
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

<!-- badges: start -->

![bookdown](https://github.com/abichat/thesis/workflows/bookdown/badge.svg)
<!-- badges: end -->

# Discovering multi-scale metagenomic signatures through hierarchical organization of species

This thesis deals with the use of hierarchical information in
differential abundance analyses in metagenomics. Taxa that make up the
microbiome are usually associated with a tree, like the taxonomy or the
phylogeny, that reflects a biological link between them. It is therefore
natural to exploit this hierarchical information to increase the
statistical power of differential abundance techniques. We first
investigated the efficiency of existing hierarchical differential
abundance detection procedures and the impact of tree choice on those.
We then developped our own hierarchical differentially abundance
detection procedure. It models the taxa associated z-scores as
realization of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process on a tree with shifts on
its optimal value then a lasso-like regression is used to identify
optimal positions and intensities of the shifts.

Statistics – Machine learning – Metagenomics – Phylogenetic tree –
Multiple testing – Stochastic
processes

# Prise en compte de l’organisation hiérarchique des espèces pour la découverte de signatures métagénomiques multi-échelles

Cette thèse porte sur l’inclusion d’informations hiérarchiques dans des
procédures de détection d’abondance différentielle sur des données
métagénomiques. Les différents taxons qui composent le microbiote sont
généralement accompagnés d’un arbre, comme la taxonomie ou la
phylogénie, qui traduit une proximité biologique entre eux. Il est
alors naturel de vouloir tirer parti de cette information hiérarchique
afin d’augmenter la puissance des tests de détection de taxons
différentiellement abondants. Dans un premier temps, nous nous sommes
intéressés aux performances des procédures hiérarchiques existantes et à
l’impact du choix de l’arbre sur celles-ci. Dans un second temps, nous
avons développé notre propre méthode hiérarchique de détection
d’abondance différentielle. Celle-ci modélise les z-scores associés à
chaque taxon comme la réalisation d’un processus d’Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
sur arbre avec sauts dans la valeur optimale du processus puis effectue
une régression de type lasso pour déterminer les positions et intensités
optimales des sauts.

Statistique – Apprentissage – Métagénomique – Arbre phylogénétique –
Tests multiples – Processus stochastiques
